Docs: add new `Mithril certification` section in website (#2324)
input-output-hk/mithril: docs/website/root/mithril/advanced/mithril-certification/cardano-transactions.md

---
sidebar_position: 1

> sidebar_label: Cardano transactions

Reviewer: Should we mention somewhere that this type of certified data can be enabled through the aggregator's configuration settings? Perhaps this is not the appropriate place to mention this information.

Author: I'm not sure that this is the right place for this. Maybe the aggregator page is better suited for this type of information.

---

# Cardano transactions

> ## Introduction
> 
> The Mithril protocol supports the certification of the **full Cardano transactions set (since genesis)**. This allows users who aim to verify the authenticity of a transaction to do so without having to download the entire Cardano blockchain.
> This is particularly useful for lightweight clients, such as mobile wallets, which may not have the resources to store the entire blockchain.
> 
> To do so, the Mithril signers and aggregators independently compute a message which represents the **Cardano transactions set** and apply the Mithril protocol to jointly sign it.
> A proof of membership is then generated on demand for the subset of transactions that a Mithril client attempts to verify the authenticity of. This proof can be verified against the aforementioned message which is signed in a Mithril certificate.
> 
> A natural structure for the message is a **Merkle tree** which:
> 
> - can be represented succinctly by its **Merkle root** (the actual message signed)
> - allows to **prove membership** of a transaction in the set by providing the **Merkle path** from the transaction to the root.
> 
> This certification is done under high constraints when operated on the Cardano mainnet:
> 
> - the current magnitude of the Cardano transactions set is more than `100 million` transactions
> - the Mithril signer footprint must remain very limited (low memory, low CPU, low disk space)
> - the on demand generation of the proof of membership must be fast and scale to high throughput.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Introduction

The Mithril protocol supports the certification of the **full Cardano transactions set (since genesis)**. This allows users to verify a transaction's authenticity without downloading the entire Cardano blockchain.
This is particularly useful for lightweight clients, such as mobile wallets, which may lack the resources to store the entire blockchain.

To achieve this, Mithril signers and aggregators independently compute a message representing the **Cardano transaction set** and apply the Mithril protocol to jointly sign it. A proof of membership is then generated on demand for the subset of transactions a Mithril client attempts to verify. This proof can be validated against the signed message, which is included in the Mithril certificate.

A natural structure for the message is a **Merkle tree**, which:

- Can be succinctly represented by its **Merkle root** (the signed message)
- Allows for membership proof of a transaction in the set by providing the **Merkle path** from the transaction to the root.

This certification is conducted under high constraints when operating on the Cardano mainnet:

- The current Cardano transaction set exceeds `100 million` transactions
- The Mithril signer footprint must remain minimal (low memory, low CPU, low disk space)
- On-demand generation of the proof of membership must be fast and scalable to high throughput.
```

:::info

> Another concern relates to the finality of the Cardano chain itself: the closer we look at the tip of the chain, the more likely blocks can be rolled back and transactions could be invalidated. However, the Mithril protocol is designed to provide certification with high guarantees. We have opted as a first implementation to certify the transactions set at a **fixed offset from the tip of the chain** (`100` blocks on the Cardano mainnet), which gives a good trade-off between the finality guarantees and the latency needed for Mithril to certify a transaction after its submission. The distance from the tip of the chain at which the transactions set is certified has an impact on the Mithril protocol itself: the closer to the tip of the chain, the more likely some signers will run a temporary fork of the Cardano chain (which would be rolled back later) which could prevent the reach of the mandatory quorum to create a valid multi-signature. The offset can be adjusted as a Mithril network parameter.
> 
> It is also worh mentioning that a new signature round is **triggered at constant pace** (every `30` blocks on the Cardano mainnet).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another consideration is the finality of the Cardano chain itself: the closer we examine the tip of the chain, the more likely blocks can be rolled back, potentially invalidating transactions. However, the Mithril protocol is designed to offer certification with high guarantees. As an initial implementation, we have chosen to certify the transaction set at a **fixed offset from the tip of the chain** (currently `100` blocks on the Cardano mainnet). This balances finality guarantees and the latency required for Mithril to certify a transaction after submission.

The distance from the tip at which the transaction set is certified affects the Mithril protocol itself: the closer to the tip, the more likely some signers may operate on a temporary fork of the Cardano chain (which will later be rolled back), potentially preventing the quorum needed to create a valid multi-signature. The offset can be adjusted as a Mithril network parameter.

It is also worth noting that a new signature round is **triggered at a constant pace** (every `30` blocks on the Cardano mainnet).
```

Author: Done

:::

## Mithril certification

The Mithril certification is generally done with the following steps:

- the **signers** compute the message which represents the type of information to sign, and then broadcast it to the aggregators
- the **aggregators** compute the same message which represents the type of information to sign, collect the signatures from the signers and attempt to aggregate them into a multi-signature
- the **clients** download "artifacts" from an untrusted source (e.g. an aggregator, a cloud service, or a peer-to-peer network), re-compute the same message which represents the type of information to verify, and verify that the message is signed by a valid Mithril multi-signature.

[![Design of the certification of the Cardano transactions](./images/cardano-transactions/end-to-end-process.jpg)](./images/cardano-transactions/end-to-end-process.jpg)

> <small><center>End to end certification for Cardano transactions</center></small>

Reviewer 2: Duplicated content - please see my suggestion above.

Author: Done

### Message computation

Unfortunately, creating a Merkle tree with `100 million` leaves is not feasible without high memory usage and long computation time, which is far beyond the operating capacity of the signer.

> However, a **Merkle forrest** where the leaves of the Merkle tree which is signed are the roots of the Merkle trees whose leaves are the transaction hashes for contiguous block number ranges is providing a good solution.

Author: Fixed

It is worth pointing out that this structure is almost append-only in the case of transactions and thus some compression can be applied to the storage when it is not used to create a membership proof: this is why the information stored on the signers and the aggregators have different volumes.

> The blocks are divided into **block ranges** of size `15` blocks. The leaves of the Merkle trees are the hashes of the transactions in the blocks of the range (`~150-1.5k` transactions per block range on the Cardano mainnet).

Author: Fixed

> ### Message computation
> 
> Unfortunately, creating a Merkle tree with `100 million` leaves is not feasible without high memory usage and long computation time, which is far beyond the operating capacity of the signer.
> However, a **Merkle forest** where the leaves of the Merkle tree which is signed are the roots of the Merkle trees whose leaves are the transaction hashes for contiguous block number ranges is providing a good solution.
> 
> It is worth pointing out that this structure is almost append-only in the case of transactions and thus some compression can be applied to the storage when it is not used to create a membership proof: this is why the information stored on the signers and the aggregators have different volumes.
> 
> The blocks are divided into **block ranges** of `15` blocks. The leaves of the Merkle trees are the hashes of the transactions in the blocks of the range (`~150-1.5k` transactions per block range on the Cardano mainnet).
> This allows to create a Merkle forest of on an average `100` times less leaves than the number of transactions in the Cardano blockchain (`~1M` leaves instead on the Cardano mainnet).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Message computation

Creating a Merkle tree with `100 million` leaves is impractical due to high memory usage and long computation times, which exceed the operational capacity of the signer. However, a **Merkle forest** offers a suitable solution. In this structure, the leaves of the signed Merkle tree are the roots of separate Merkle trees, each representing a contiguous block range. Each Merkle tree’s leaves are the transaction hashes within those blocks.

This structure is nearly append-only for transactions, allowing for some stored data compression when not used to create a membership proof. As a result, the volumes of information stored on signers and aggregators differ.

The blocks are divided into **block ranges** of `15` blocks. The leaves of the Merkle trees are the hashes of the transactions in the blocks within each range (`~150-1.5k` transactions per block range on the Cardano mainnet).
This reduces the number of leaves in the Merkle forest to approximately `1 million` on the Cardano mainnet – about `100` times fewer than the number of transactions in the blockchain.
```

Author: Done

> This allows to create a Merkle forrest of on an average `100` times less leaves than the number of transactions in the Cardano blockchain (`~1M` leaves instead on the Cardano mainnet).

Author: Fixed

[![Design of the certification of the Cardano transactions](./images/cardano-transactions/message-aggregator.jpg)](./images/cardano-transactions/message-aggregator.jpg)
<small><center>Message creation when aggregating on the aggregator</center></small>

> The process is almost the same on the signer, except that the transactions of the block ranges are ephemerally stored and only their compressed representation is kept in the long run (the Merkle root of the block range Merkle tree) once the blocks are final (older than `k` blocks from the tip of the chain, `2160` on the Cardano mainnet). This allows drastic compression of the storage on the signers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The process on the signer is similar, with the key difference being that the transactions within the block ranges are stored temporarily. Once the blocks are finalized (older than `k` blocks from the tip of the chain, where `k` is `2160` on the Cardano mainnet), only their compressed representation is retained – the Merkle root of the block range Merkle tree. This approach significantly reduces the storage requirements on the signers.
```

[![Design of the certification of the Cardano transactions](./images/cardano-transactions/message-signer.jpg)](./images/cardano-transactions/message-signer.jpg)
<small><center>Message creation when signing on the aggregator</center></small>

:::info

> The Merkle tree inner nodes are computed with the `BLAKE2s-256` hash function: the children bytes representation are concatenated and hashed to compute the parent node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Merkle tree inner nodes are computed with the `BLAKE2s-256` hash function. This involves concatenating the byte representations of the child nodes and then hashing them to compute the parent node.
```

Author: Done

:::

### Authenticity verification

The verification process operates on a subset of the Cardano set that can be certified (fully or partially):

> - the client calls a prover route on the aggregator which computes a **Merkle proof of membership** for the transactions signed in the latest snapshot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the client calls a prover route exposed by the aggregator which computes a **Merkle proof of membership** for the transactions signed in the latest snapshot
```

Author: Fixed

> ### Authenticity verification
> 
> The verification process operates on a subset of the Cardano set that can be certified (fully or partially):
> 
> - the client calls a prover route exposed by the aggregator which computes a **Merkle proof of membership** for the transactions signed in the latest snapshot
> - the client verifies the proof of membership is valid and that its Merkle root (the message) is signed by a valid Mithril certificate.
> 
> [![Design of the certification of the Cardano transactions](./images/cardano-transactions/proof-client.jpg)](./images/cardano-transactions/proof-client.jpg)
> <small><center>Proof creation done by the aggregator _(to verify 'Tx4' and `Tx62')_</center></small>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Authenticity verification

The verification process operates on a subset of the Cardano set that can be certified (fully or partially):

- The client calls a prover route exposed by the aggregator, which computes a **Merkle proof of membership** for the transactions signed in the latest snapshot
- The client verifies that the proof of membership is valid and that its Merkle root (the message) is signed by a valid Mithril certificate.

[![Design of the certification of the Cardano transactions](./images/cardano-transactions/proof-client.jpg)](./images/cardano-transactions/proof-client.jpg)
<small><center>Proof creation done by the aggregator _(to verify 'Tx4' and `Tx62')_</center></small>
```
